# Cryptography for Dummies

## Task 1 - Intro

#### Why we need cryptography?

Without encryption communications over the internet will be very insecure, and it would be very easy for someone to see your data. 

Fortunately this isn't true, and almost all of the data you get/send over the internet is encrypted and cannot be seen in plain text by someone who got access to it.

## Task 2 - Types Of Cryptography


### Encryption

Process of converting plain text into ciphertext

### Decryption

Reverse process of encryption which convert ciphertext to plain text using correct method and key

### Key

A piece of information (like a secret number, string, or file) that controls the encryption and decryption. Without the correct key, the ciphertext can’t be turned back into the original message

### Types Of Cryptography

There are two types of cryptography:

- Symmetric 
- Asymetric

### Symmetric Cryptography

Both users posses the same key for encrypting and decrypting messages

### Asymetric Cryptography

The encryptions and decryption keys are different

#### Public key

Th encryption key is called the public key

#### Private Key

The decryption key is called the private key

## Why Asymetric Crptography Is Used ?

Aymetric cryptography is used as it's more secure! 

If you are using symmetric cryptography and someone takes your key he can encrypt and decrypt messages that you send. While in asymmetric cryptography he can't decrypt the messages you encrypted with the public key. Only the holder of the Private key can decrypt them. 

> Note : Symmetric cryptography is faster than asymmetric, but asymmetric is more secure

### Answer the questions below

- What type of cryptography is more secure?

    `asymetric`

- What type of cryptography is faster?

    `symetric`

- What type of cryptography will a Bank site use?

    `asymetric`

- What will you use to encrypt your messages in asymmetric cryptography?

    `public key`

- What will you use to decrypt messages in asymmetric cryptography?

    `private key`

- Does symmetric cryptography use two different keys for encryption/decryption? (aye/nay)

    `nay`

## Task 3 - What Is a Hash

### Hash

Hashes are a long strings of letters and numbers generated by hashing algorithms. They take plain text and make it a hash.

The important thing about hashes is that they are not reversible. There's no way to decrypt/decode a hash.

Popular hashing algorithms are : **MD5 (Message Digest 5) and SHA (Secure Hash Algorithm)**.

#### Example:

That's how the word "hello" looks as MD5 hash : `5d41402abc4b2a76b9719d911017c592`

### What Are Hashes Used For ?

The most popular use of hashes is for file identification and storing sensitive data, like passwords.

#### Example Usage:

- When you create an account on a website your password is converted to hash and this hash is stored in the server's database
- So when you login the password that you type in will be converted to a hash, the server will take it and compare it with the hash in it's database, if it's the same that means your password is correct and the server will let you in

#### MD5 Hashes

MD5 hashes are also used to ensure the data integrity of files. 

Because the MD5 hashing algorithm always produces the same output for the same given input, it can be used to compare a hash of the source file with a newly created hash of the destination file to check that it is intact and unmodified.

### Answer the questions below

- What's the MD5 hash of "hashes are cool"?

    `f762d32e3c160900d94b683e927555b9`

- What does MD5 stand for?

    `Message Digest 5`

- Who created MD5?

    `Ronald Rivest`

## Task 4 - Decoding/Encoding

**There's difference between encoding and encrypting**

Let's say you have an encrypted file, the only way to decrypt it is using key. While encoded data can be decoded immediately, without keys. It's NOT a form of encryption, it just a way of representing data.

A very popular encoding is **Base64**. Here's how "hi there" looks with Base64 encoding : `aGkgdGhlcmU=`

### Answer the questions below

- Encode the string "cryptographyisuseful" with Base64

    `Y3J5cHRvZ3JhcGh5aXN1c2VmdWw=`

- Decode the string "dGhlIHNlY3JldCB3b3JkIGlzIDogd2F0ZXJtZWxvbg==". What's the secret word?

    `watermelon`

